# kdb+ and q: A Language for Vector Prgramming
## Types in q:
  1.  <em><b>int</em></b>: q has different types of integer types including: 16 byte, 32 byte, and 64 byte. In the lates version of q, i.e., q 3+, the integers are 64 byte and is called <em>long</em>. A shorter type of integer exists in q that is called <em>int</em> and should be followed by an <em>i</em>.
  2.  <em><b>boolean</b></em>: the boolean type in q are defined with 0 and 1 following by a small b, i.e., 1b for True and 0b for False. q stores each boolean value in a byte.
  A <em><b>list of boolean values</b></em> is defined as a sequence of 0 and 1 following by a small be at the end, for example 0110111b is a list containing 7 boolean values.
  Comparing two values in any types results in a boolean value, e.g., 42=6\*7 results in 1b.
  3. <em><b>Date and Time</b></em>: q counts dates from the millinium, and counts Time from mid-night. Therefore, we can have the following expressions:
*   2000.01.01=0 results 1b
*   1999.12.31=-1 results 1b
*   2000.01.02+1 results 2000.01.02


## Arithmatic Operators:
  * Like all other prgoramming languages, q prvides all 4 main arithmatic operators, but with one difference that the division operator is represented by percentage symbol (%).
  * In q, arithmatic operators are vectorized operators. It means the unlinke other programming languages, the arithmatic operators are applied to two vectors, or two lists, element-wise (each element from the first vector and its corresponding element from second vector).


  {% include note.html text="Comparing two unequal-sized vectors or evaluating them against any arithmetic operators raise an error.
  </p>
" %}



## q special operators:
  1.  <b>count</b>: counts number of elements exist in a list.
  2.  <b>till</b>: <em>till a</em> generates a list of numbers from 0 to a<em>a</em>, but 3 is not included.
  3.  

{% include note.html text="Unlike all other programming languages, q applies the arithmetic operators differently when evaluating expressions. The arithmetic operators are evaluated in order from left to right without discrimination.
" %}


## Tables
Since vectors are the data structure that q is based upon, and vectorize operators are the cornerstones of the q language, we may assume that designing a table based on vectors would be considerably easier in q. If the columns in a table are only some lists, or equivalently, some vectors, the table will be a collection of columns rather than rows, as opposed to what we see in other database and programming concepts. Thus, applying the q's vectorized operators to a table defined with this approach will amazingly efficient.
Example: let's define a oversimplified trade table containing some columns including: dates, times, quantities, symbol (ticker symbol), and prices.

{% include important.html text="Unlike other database and programming languages, q's tables are collection of columns rather than collection of rows
" %}

```python
# defining a series (vector) of 10000000 random dates
codes:
dates: 2018.01.01+10000000?31
count dates
```
    10000000

```python
# defining a series (vector) of 10000000 random times
times: 10000000?24:00:00.0000

# defining a series (vector) of 10000000 random number 
# that represents the quantities
qtys: 1+10000000?100

# defining a series (vector) of 10000000 random number within 0-2
ixs: 10000000?3

# defining a series (vector) of 10000000 random lables 'aapl', 'amzn', 
# and 'googl'each of which associates with one element of ixs
syms: `aapl`amzn`googl ixs
syms
```
    `amzn`amzn`amzn`googl`amzn`amzn`aapl`googl`amzn`amzn`aapl`googl`amzn`aapl`aap..

q considers a list to be a function that maps the index to the items at that index. In other words, a function that retrieve the item at that position.

172.0 1189.0 1073.0 ixs

pxs:(1+10000000?.03)*172 1189.0 1073.0 ixs
